- The effective reproductive number R<sub>e</sub> quantifies how many people are infected on average by an infected person. We provide the latest estimate of the effective reproductive number R<sub>e</sub> in Switzerland. This figure is updated daily with the latest available data from the FOPH. The R<sub>e</sub> estimates are available in csv format at https://github.com/covid-19-Re/dailyRe-Data.
- The R<sub>e</sub> value which is calculated today reflects the infection dynamics of 10-13 days ago for Switzerland and 14-17 days ago for cantons, due to the delay between infection and positive test result. We perform new calculations whenever new data from FOPH is available. On Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, this does however not result in additional days for which R<sub>e</sub> values are available due to weekend effects. Thus, on Friday, four additional days with R<sub>e</sub> values become available. The most recent R<sub>e</sub> value is marked with an asterisk in the figure.
- **IMPORTANT**: In general, we note that the R<sub>e</sub> estimates for the last days may still be consolidated during subsequent days. This consolidation in particular occurs for small regions, during changes in the dynamics, and in case of small case numbers. For details on methods and caveats please see below.
- **UPDATE (25.1.2021)**: We now construct 95% confidence intervals based on a block bootstrapping procedure. We found in simulations that this new procedure better reflects the uncertainty in the parameter estimates compared to our previous procedure. We are currently writing up an explanation of the new procedure and will post it as soon as it is available. In the meantime, the method can be accessed through our [code](https://github.com/covid-19-Re/shiny-dailyRe). Our general approach (up to the bootstrapping procedure) is explained [here](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.11.26.20239368v1.article-info).
