<h4>Assessment of the current epidemiological situation</h4>

The effective reproductive number R<sub>e</sub> quantifies how many people are infected on average by an infected person. In the following figure, we provide the latest estimate of the effective reproductive number R<sub>e</sub> in Switzerland. This figure is updated daily with the latest available data from the FOPH. The R<sub>e</sub> value which is calculated today reflects the infection dynamics of about 10 days ago, due to the delay between infection and positive test result. The most recent R<sub>e</sub> value is marked with an asterisk in the figure.

An overview of the current epidemiological situation based on the reproductive number R<sub>e</sub> and other indicators can be found [here](https://sciencetaskforce.ch/en/news-english/). More extensive updates of the epidemiological situation are published by the Science Task Force in the form of [Policy Briefs](https://ncs-tf.ch/en/policy-briefs).

More information and additional tools for the assessment of the epidemiological situation based on R<sub>e</sub> can be found [here](https://ibz-shiny.ethz.ch/covid-19-re/). In particular, we provide estimates of R<sub>e</sub> for individual cantons, larger Swiss regions, and other countries. These R<sub>e</sub> estimates, as well as the case numbers per country, are displayed on a world map. Additionally, we show estimates on the changes of R<sub>e</sub> following the introduction or release of interventions. Lastly, we display the estimated number of daily new infections based on the daily case data. This time course is used for the R<sub>e</sub> calculations. The results for R<sub>e</sub> are available as a .csv file.

<h4>Summary of the course of the epidemic so far, based on R<sub>e</sub></h4>

Since the beginning of the epidemic in Switzerland we have observed the following trends in R<sub>e</sub>. The effective reproductive number R<sub>e</sub> in early March was 2-3, which is in the range of values reported for other countries. The R<sub>e</sub> fell below the critical value of 1 in mid March. R<sub>e</sub> increased continuously from the second week of May to a peak in mid-June, with maximum values around 1.4-1.9. Another smaller peak was observed in July. The peaks were driven by infection dynamics in separate geographic regions in Switzerland. During the summer, R<sub>e</sub> reached a steady value around 1.1. This meant that the case numbers doubled approximately every 4 weeks.

From mid-September onwards, R<sub>e</sub> rose very sharply with a peak of over 1.5 at the end of the month. This corresponded to a doubling time of the case numbers of about one week. The R<sub>e</sub> based on hospitalizations followed the same trend and rose significantly above 1 for the first time since March. The rapid spread was observed in all Swiss cantons. From October onwards, R<sub>e</sub> has declined based on all indicators.


<h4>Caveats</h4>

In general, we note that the R<sub>e</sub> estimates for the last five days may still be consolidated during subsequent days. We thus base our interpretation on estimated trends over several days.

However, due to the high test positivity rate and delayed hospital reports during the second wave, estimates based on the case numbers and hospitalizations may be too low during this time. The R<sub>e</sub> based on positivity (confirmed cases/tests) is reliable if the persons tested are a random cross section of the population; since we test specifically symptomatic persons, this R<sub>e</sub> value may also be biased. During the second wave, the R<sub>e</sub> value based on deaths is the most reliable. However, this R<sub>e</sub> value reflects the epidemiological situation with a time lag of about 3 weeks. The reason is that it takes about 17 days between new infection and death.

R<sub>e</sub> values above 1 during the summer were not a consequence of an increased testing effort or of false positive test results. The number of weekly tests indeed increased substantially over the summer. Simultaneously however, the percentage of positive tests among all tests (i.e. the test positivity rate) increased from 0.4% in June to >20% in October. This also means that we estimate R<sub>e</sub> based on the positivity rate to be significantly above 1 for most of the summer. Additionally, the specificity of PCR tests is very high, leading to essentially no false positive results which could bias our estimates.

<h4>Methods</h4>

The reported R<sub>e</sub> for a given day is the mean R<sub>e</sub> over the last 3 days. We report the estimated median with the 95% uncertainty interval. The method to estimate R<sub>e</sub> is described [here](https://ibz-shiny.ethz.ch/covid-19-re/methods.pdf). Since June, we first smooth the data with a LOESS step, and then estimate the infection dates using a [deconvolution](https://www.pnas.org/content/106/51/21825) step (discussed [here](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.12.20099366v1) and [here](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.06.18.20134858v2)). Then, we estimate R<sub>e</sub>  using the [EpiEstim](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/EpiEstim/index.html) software from the estimated infection dates. Results based on data from June 26, 2020 using the original method can be accessed [here](https://smw.ch/article/doi/smw.2020.20271).

Since June 2020, all estimates of R<sub>e</sub> for Switzerland are based on data from the FOPH. On weekdays, the FOPH communicates the number of newly confirmed cases that they received over the last 24 hours. These cases typically stem from the last three days. To estimate R<sub>e</sub> we therefore analyze the number of newly confirmed cases from each particular day ignoring the past two days. As a result, the numbers in our dashboard are different from the numbers given in the daily FOPH situation reports.
